---
layout: post
title: Errata in Essential Astrophysics
---

I've adopted Kenneth Lang's [_Essential Astrophysics_](http://link.springer.com/book/10.1007%2F978-3-642-35963-7) for my ASTRO 320 class at U. Alberta this year.  It has the wonderful feature of being relatively low cost owing to the University Library subscribing to the Springer eBooks.  Thanks, Library.  Unfortunately, the book is a First Edition.  As such there are typos.  Here is a list of the ones we've found so far.


#### Section 2.4, Page 45 
The Planck function (Eq. 2.17) is given as 

$$
B_\nu(\nu,T) = \frac{2h\nu^3}{c^2}\frac{1}{\exp\left[h\nu/(kT)-1\right]}
$$

where it should be 

$$
B_\nu(\nu,T) = \frac{2h\nu^3}{c^2}\frac{1}{\exp [h\nu/(kT)]-1}.
$$


#### Section 2.4, Page 45 
The value of $$\pi$$ is given as 3.13159 and should be 3.14159.

#### Section 2.4, Page 46

The Planck function (Eq. 2.18) is given as 

$$
B_\lambda(\lambda,T) = \frac{2h c^2 }{\lambda^5}\frac{1}{\exp\left[hc/(\lambda kT)-1\right]}
$$

where it should be 

$$
B_\lambda(\lambda,T) = \frac{2hc^2}{\lambda^5}\frac{1}{\exp [hc/(\lambda kT)]-1}.
$$

#### Section 2.4, Page 48
The radiation energy (Eq. 2.23) density

$$
u_\nu(T) = \frac{8\pi \nu^2}{c^3}\frac{1}{\exp\left[\left(\frac{h\nu}{kT}\right)-1\right]}
$$

should read

$$
u_\nu(\nu, T) = \frac{8\pi\nu^2}{c^3}\frac{1} {\exp\left(\frac{h\nu}{kT}\right)-1}
$$

#### Section 2.4, Page 49
Above Equation 2.29, the text says "energy flowing out of the blackbody over $$\pi$$ sr, or over the hemisphere facing an observer."

A hemisphere is $$2\pi$$ sr, but the equation is correct.  The "missing" factor of $$1/2$$ comes from the shrinking projected size of the differential area at larger angles.

#### Section 2.4, Page 50 
The Stefan-Boltzmann Constant is given as $$5.6704\times 10^{-8}\mathrm{~W~m^{-2}~K^{4}}$$ and it should be $$5.6704\times 10^{-8}\mathrm{~W~m^{-2}~K^{-4}}$$.  (Thank you Tanner S.)

#### Section 5.4.1, Page 141
The book gives the solar wind pressure as a "startling $$10^{18}$$ Pa," which would be truly startling and would also deliver enough energy to destroy the planet in a year.  The actual numbers that NOAA bandies about are closer to $$2\times 10^{-9}$$ Pa.

#### Section 6.3, Page 174
Boltzmann was born in 1844 not 1894, which Michelle S. noted the date in the text would be hard to reconcile with Boltzmann deriving his eponymous distribution in 1872.

#### Section 8.3.3, Page 232
An MeV is $$1.602\times 10^{-13}\mbox{ J}$$ not 1.692 as given at the bottom of the page.
