---
layout: post
title: Astropy tables
---

A good way of keeping track of heterogeneous data is to use an [astropy table](http://docs.astropy.org/en/stable/table/).  This allows you to track a variety of different types of data in a single, manipulable format.  There are a bunch of other approaches to this from [python dictionaries](https://docs.python.org/2/tutorial/datastructures.html) or fancy things like `PANDAS` [data frames](http://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/dsintro.html).  Astropy tables are good because they interface neatly with FITS binary tables, a common format in our field.  There is also some minimal LaTeX support should you need it for journal articles.

You may, at some point want to create your own table-like data.  To build a table from scratch requires defining your own table structure.  I find it most logical to build an empty table and then add a row each time through a processing loop.  For example, you can define a table as follows:

	from astropy.table import Table, Column

	column_names = ['RA','Dec','Mass','Name']
	# This specifies data types.  f8 means an 4-byte floating point 
	# number and S20 means a 20 character long string.
	column_types = ['f4','f4','f4','S20']

	t = Table(names=column_names, dtype = column_types)

Alternatively, you can build a table up in a loop, which can be useful if you read in column names from another file.

	t2 = Table()
	for colname,coltype in zip(column_names,column_types):
		c = Column(name=colname,dtype=coltype)		
		t2.add_column(c)
		
Then, in each time through a processing loop, you can use the `add_row()` method to append a row to the table.  What is clever is that you can then access the last (just added) row of the table using the table row index -1:

	for thisstep in longloop:
		ra_value, dec_value = somecalculation()
		t.add_row()
		t[-1]['RA'] = ra_value
		t[-1]['DEC'] = dec_value
		t[-1]['Mass'] = mass_value
		t[-1]['Name'] = this_cloud_name

Once finished, you have a nice astropy table which you can then manipulate or potentially export:

	t.write('mytable.fits',overwrite=True)
	
Your data are saved for next time or viewable in Topcat and the like.
